1 UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME STRATEGIC PLAN 2022-2025 2 3 Foreword This is a critical moment for the world, and for development. A planetary emergen- cy and the pandemic have depleted the world’s natural resources and widened poverty and inequality. Up to one billion people could be living in extreme poverty by 2030 unless we seize this opportunity for a decisive push towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). But this is also a moment of choice: an op- portunity to learn from our experience, to do things differently, to aspire to greater shared goals. This new Strategic Plan 2022-2025 describes how UNDP intends to work togeth- er with our partners to deliver what’s required of us in these extraordinary times. Collaborat- ing across the revitalized UN system and be- yond for stronger collective results. Applying integrated approaches aimed at transforma- tive change. Supporting governments and communities to rebound from COVID-19 and build forward better. The Strategic Plan is grounded in UNDP’s continued commitment to eradicating poverty, accompanying countries in their pathways towards the SDGs and working towards the Paris Agreement. It envisions bold goals, making a difference to millions of lives, including through tackling multidimensional poverty, energy access, elections participa- tion and development financing. It explains how UNDP will develop our six signature solutions – powered by digitalisation, innova- tion and development financing – for greater impact. It sets out practical steps towards be- coming an even more agile and anticipatory organisation, investing further in our people, business model and operational excellence. The Plan describes how the combination of our deep local experience and our rich glob- al network, tapping into countries’ knowledge and shared experience, delivers value to our partners. How we will foster innovation and creativity to help change systems and tackle the hardest challenges standing be- tween us and the SDGs. All this to scale and accelerate progress towards green, inclusive tran- sitions that empower every last person through greater opportunity and resilience. The Plan is the result of extensive collaboration with our many partners. I am immensely grateful to them, and to all our UNDP teams, whose contribu- tions have helped produce a Plan that truly reflects the diversity of all the countries, communities and people whom UNDP serves. I invite you to read the Plan itself and learn more. With your support and collaboration, together UNDP can work with countries to expand people’s choices for a fairer, sustainable future, to build the world envisioned by Agenda 2030 with planet and people in balance. Achim Steiner Administrator United Nations Development Programme Photo: UNDP/Michael Atwood 4 Strategic context Advancing the future of development The challenge of reaching Agenda 2030 was already significant, even before the COVID-19 pandemic hit. Compounded by a climate emergency, political polarization and challenged multilateralism, continued conflicts and forced displacement, the number of people living in poverty rose in 2020 for the first time since 1998 by an estimated 119-124 million. Inequalities are growing, and the traditional social contract is no longer working for many. Today’s development challenges are dynamic, interconnected puzzles of multidimensional risk that require systemic solutions. Multilateral cooperation is vital in addressing these shared challenges that cross boundaries of geography and time. No country has yet achieved the combination of very high human development with a light ecological footprint. The impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss are growing. In this complex, uncertain landscape, the SDGs and the Paris Agreement offer clarity of purpose and a way forward. In the next four years, UNDP will work with countries to make a difference to millions of lives: 100 million people to escape multidimensional poverty 500 million people to gain access to clean energy over US$1 trillion 20,000 people 170 countries and territories of public expenditure and private capital investment in the SDGs at UNDP working together across 800 million people to participate in elections, many for the first time Promoting As the United Nations system technical lead on the socio-economic response to COVID-19, UNDP is supporting govern- ments in developing and implementing inclusive economic stimulus packages to restore the livelihoods of those newly poor, through combined interventions including health, education and digital access. In Viet Nam, UNDP is “future-proofing” governance systems through anticipatory approaches, and better understanding and management of risk. In Somalia, UNDP is helping strengthen community resilience to climate change and water scarcity by supporting water conservation infrastructure and education at local level, coupled with national policies on disaster risk reduction. The Africa Mini-Grid Programme, supported by UNDP, is improving the financial viability of renewable energy mini-grids in 18 countries, encouraging private investment, lower tariffs and expanded service. 4 5 Helping Supporting Supporting Global COVID-19 response Beyond climate resilience Renewable energy at scale Governance for the future 6 7 What we do Development ﬁnancing 2030 Agenda B u i l d i n g r e s i l i e n c e L e a v i n g n o o n e b e h i n d Structural transformation Poverty & inequality Governance Resilience Environment Energy Gender equality Global public goods Integrated development solutions driven by country priorities Digitalisation Strategic innovation UNDP’s work is summarized in the Strategic Plan by this “3x6x3” framework: This combination will help UNDP continue to deliver on what it does best: integrated development solutions driven by country priorities. 3 DIRECTIONS OF CHANGE supporting countries towards three directions of change: structural transformation, leaving no-one behind, building resilience 6 SIGNATURE SOLUTIONS ENABLERS 3 through six signature solutions: poverty and inequality, governance, resilience, environment, energy, gender equality enhanced by three enablers: strategic innovation, digitalisation, development financing X X UNDP’s development offer 8 9 Poverty and inequality Tackling inequality of opportuni- ties by investing in the enhanced capabilities people need to move above the poverty line and keep moving forwards. Gender equality Confronting the structural obstacles to gender equality and strengthening women’s economic empower- ment and leadership. Gender equality Confronting the structural obstacles to gender equality and strengthening women’s economic empower- ment and leadership. Energy Increasing energy access for those furthest behind and accelerating the transition to renew- able energy. Environment Putting nature and the environment at the heart of national economies and planning; helping govern- ments protect, manage and value their natural assets. Resilience Supporting countries and communities in building resilience to diverse shocks and crises, includ- ing conflict, climate change, disasters and epidemics. Governance Helping countries address emerging complexities by “future-proofing” gover- nance systems through anticipatory approaches and better management of risk. Signature solutions Supercharged for greater results Learning from the experience of the last four years, UNDP will: ⊲ Prioritize where country demands are greatest ⊲ Focus on UNDP’s strongest capabilities and role within the UN system ⊲ Refine and develop the signature solutions for greater impact and scale ⊲ Deliver integrated solutions through a systems approach Directions of change Guiding people and planet beyond 2025 During this Plan and beyond, UNDP will be accompanying countries towards the SDGs through country programmes, driven by national development choices, and with poverty eradication at their core. To this end, we support countries in pursuing three directions of systemic change: Structural transformation: including green, inclusive and digital transitions: working with countries to effect change in systems and structures that shape a country’s sustainable development Building resilience: strengthening countries and institutions to prevent, mitigate and respond to crisis, conflict, natural disasters, climate and social and economic shocks Leaving no-one behind: a rights-based approach centered on empowerment, inclusion, equity, human agency and human development 11 Enablers Maximising development impact Enablers are capacities and approaches to scale-up development impact for country partners and within UNDP’s own systems: Digitalisation Supporting countries to build inclusive, ethical and sustainable digital societies Development financing Partnering with governments and the private sector to align public and private capital flows with the SDGs and mobilise finance at scale Strategic innovation Empowering governments and communities to enhance the performance of entire systems, making them adaptive and resilient Global partnerships Forging connections for the SDGs Delivering results at the speed and scale needed to reach Agenda 2030 depends on close partnerships with a diverse range of actors working towards common goals. UNDP’s longstanding partnerships leverage the diverse capabilities, resources and knowledge of our partners: MEMBER STATES UNITED NATIONS AGENCIES INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS CIVIL SOCIETY AND NGOS ACADEMIA PRIVATE SECTOR The next four years will see UNDP strengthening these existing partnerships and forging new ones. Using our convening power to continue building strategic alliances with marginalized voices and empowering local actors. The partnerships of the future require flexible instruments, modalities and funding, better suited to new types of partners or new ways of collaborating (e.g., “creative commons” approaches towards sharing intellectual property). UNDP will also work with partners to advocate for, and facilitate, global and regional cooperation around common challenges – from pandemics to conflict to green transitions – while showcasing the value of multilateral solutions. 11 10 12 13 A strong partner in the UN system Complementing our capabilities As we work with partners across the UN system, we draw on each other’s complementary strengths and capabilities to deliver stronger results. With the United Nations Development System to deliver coherent and integrated development solutions, driven by country demand, that maximise collective results and impact As technical lead of the UN’s socio-economic response to the COVID-19 pandemic Working with governments and partners under the leadership of the World Health Organisation and UNICEF to support COVID-19 vaccine preparedness and deployment With UN Volunteers, United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund, UN Office for South-South Cooperation, and United Nations Capital Development Fund to reinforce the revitalized development system Connecting partners to UNDP expertise and experience across country, regional and global teams through the Global Policy Network 12 T h e p o w e r o f i n t e g r a t i o n U n d e r s t a n d i n g a n d m a n a g i n g ri s k M o d e r n is i n g o p e r a ti o n a l s y s t e m s a n d s tr u c t u r e s U p d at in g pr o g ra m m i n g ar ra n g e m e nt s a n d i m pl e m e nt at io n m o d al it ie s Better never stops Building from lessons learned The Strategic Plan 2018-2021 set out an ambitious agenda: to transform UNDP into a more nimble, innovative thought leader, more effective and efficient at delivering results, a trusted partner for countries in reaching the SDGs. The Strategic Plan 2022-2025 continues in this direction, building on the progress of the last four years. It draws on assessments, evaluations and audits, and on the lessons of experience, including from our COVID-19 response. Conversations with diverse practitioners and thought leaders from government, civil society, the private sector, the UN system and UNDP staff worldwide have also enriched the Plan. Key lessons to which the Plan responds include: 13 14 15 14 15 Global, regional, local UNDP’s network brings the world together, driving sustainable impact and results for people and planet. • Brussels Representation Office (covering European Union) • Geneva Representation Office • Nordic Representation Office (covering Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden) • Tokyo Representation Office • Washington Representation Office • Addis Ababa Regional Service Centre • Angola • Benin • Botswana • Burkina Faso • Burundi • Cameroon • Cape Verde • Central African Republic • Chad • Comoros • Congo (Dem. Republic of) • Congo (Republic of) • Côte d’Ivoire • Equatorial Guinea • Eritrea • Eswatini • Ethiopia • Gabon • Gambia • Ghana • Guinea • Guinea-Bissau • Kenya • Lesotho • Liberia • Madagascar • Malawi • Mali • Mauritania • Mauritius and Seychelles • Mozambique • Namibia • Niger • Nigeria • Rwanda • São Tomé and Príncipe • Senegal • Sierra Leone • South Africa • South Sudan • Tanzania • Togo • Uganda • Zambia • Zimbabwe • New York headquarters North America Africa • Panama Regional Hub • Argentina • Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean (covering Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Lucia, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines) • Bolivia • Brazil • Chile • Colombia • Costa Rica • Cuba • Dominican Republic Latin America and the Caribbean • Ecuador • El Salvador • Guatemala • Guyana • Haiti • Honduras • Jamaica (covering The Bahamas, Belize, Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Jamaica, Turks and Caicos Islands) • Mexico • Panama • Paraguay • Peru • Suriname • Trinidad and Tobago (covering Aruba, Curacao, Sint Maarten, Trinidad and Tobago) • Uruguay • Venezuela • Bangkok Regional Hub • Afghanistan • Bangladesh • Bhutan • Cambodia • China • Democratic People’s Republic of Korea • India • Indonesia • Iran • Lao PDR • Malaysia (covering Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, Singapore) • Maldives • Mongolia • Myanmar • Nepal • Pacific Office in Fiji (covering Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) • Pakistan • Papua New Guinea • Philippines • Samoa (covering Samoa, Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau) • Sri Lanka • Thailand • Timor-Leste • Viet Nam • Istanbul Regional Hub • Albania • Armenia • Azerbaijan • Belarus • Bosnia and Herzegovina • Cyprus • Georgia • Kazakhstan • Kosovo (as per UNSCR 1244) • Kyrgyzstan • Moldova • Montenegro • North Macedonia • Serbia • Tajikistan • Turkey • Turkmenistan • Ukraine • Uzbekistan • Amman Regional Hub • Algeria • Bahrain • Djibouti • Egypt • Iraq • Jordan • Kuwait • Lebanon • Libya • Morocco • Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People • Saudi Arabia • Somalia • Sudan • Syria • Tunisia • Yemen Arab States Europe and Central Asia Asia and the Pacific Representation Offices Policy Centres • Nairobi Global Centre on Resilient Ecosystems and Desertification • Oslo Governance Centre • Istanbul International Center for Private Sector in Development • Seoul Policy Centre for Knowledge Exchange through SDG Partnerships • Singapore Global Centre for Technology, Innovation and Sustainable Development 16 United Nations Development Programme One United Nations Plaza New York, NY 10017 www.undp.org © UNDP 2021